to conduct an investigation and study of
the extent if any to which illegal
improper or unethical activities were
engaged in by any persons acting
individually or in combination with
others in the presidential election of
1972 or any campaign canvass or other
activity related to it I would now like
a turn to the political intelligence and
security plan design for the campaign
but ultimately rejected well was a
member of my staff the use of mr.
Galasso wits slowly diminished and if I
had no need for such investigative work
and only requested Caufield to obtain
investigative information as someone
else in the staff requested it well I
did try to find assignments for
Caulfield it related to the work of the
counsel's office
it was difficult in that he was not a
lawyer mr. Caulfield was aware of the
situation and in the spring of 1971 he
came to me and totally me he was
thinking of leaving the White House
staff to establish an investigative
security consulting corporation he felt
there wasn't a need in a market for such
an activity but and what he described as
a Republican inner tell the inner tel
firm being a long-established firm
that's been in existence for a number of
years working in the field he told me
that he felt that he should get started
as soon as possible so that he could
have a going concern by campaign time
and his firm could provide investigative
security assistance to the campaign we
casually discussed this on several
occasions the basic and initial concept
he had developed was an operation that
could be funded by contracts with
corporations mr. Caufield firm would
provide services for these corporations
but would also provide free services to
the 1972 reelection campaign I recall
telling Garfield that I could not help
him in the intelligence field because I
did not have it in the expertise in the
area but I advised him that he should
work with a lawyer and developing the
concept he had just outlined to me
because it was brought with legal
problems for
and I told him the corporations are
prohibited under federal law for making
direct or indirect campaign
contributions shortly after these
conversations Caulfield informed me that
he had formed a group to develop a plan
to submit to mr. Ehrlich and mr.
Haldeman mr. Mitchell the Planning Group
intended to become the principal
officers the corporation once it
commenced its activity Caulfield and the
group spent several months developing
their plans and in early August or
September of 1971 Caulfield brought me a
memorandum entitled operation sandwich
and told me that he was seeking a
meeting with mr. Ehrlichman to discuss
the matter and requested that I assist
him in getting a meeting with mr.
Mitchell I do not know mr. Caulfield met
with mr. Ehrlichman if he did I was not
present and have no knowledge of the
meeting I read the memorandum and found
it to be a privately operated extension
of the types of things that Caulfield
had been performing for mr. Ehrlich when
I returned the memorandum to Caulfield
to told him I would raise it with
Mitchell for the best of my recollection
much recollection operation Sandwich
envisioned the creation of a corporation
called security Consulting Group
incorporated which was to have offices
in Washington Chicago and New York
militia haven't overt and a covert
capacity the covert capacity would have
operated out of New York presumably
under the aegis of mr. lazerwitz it was
to be separate and apart from the other
operations in Washington Chicago the
principal activity of the security
controlling
Consulting Group was to provide private
security for all phases of the campaign
but the New York covert operation would
have the capacity to provide bagman
carry money and engage in electronic
surveillance if called upon to do so
although I returned the copy of the
operation sandwich memorandum given to
me by mr. Caulfield I did find in my
records a copy of a proposed budget
which reflects some of the items I've
just mentioned
I also found a number of memorandum
relating to the campaign secure security
aspects of the plan
I have submitted these documents to the
committee exhibit number nine I did
discuss operation sand wedge with mr.
Mitchell I recall that he was not
interested at all he told me that he
thought that Jack Hoffman was a fine
person but he felt that the principal
problems relate to security in the
problems that demonstrators might cause
to the campaign
mr. Mitchell said he wanted the lawyer
to handle any such operation and asked
me to think about Canada's I told him
the jerk-off who had requested an
opportunity to discuss his plan with him
I told him that Jack I told him I told
jack I would conveyed a message Mitchell
did not wish to discuss the proposal so
I kept putting it off field off and when
he raised it with me because I like Jack
I did not want to hurt his feelings I
continued to keep putting him off I also
recall that Ehrlichman raised operation
sandwich with me I do not know if this
was a result of his meeting the coffee
or Caulfield sending him a copy the
memorandum Ehrlichman told me that he
would like to keep Tony you Lassa wits
around during the campaign but he did
not think much of mr. Caulfield's
proposed grand plan Peloquin told me
that Mitchell knew about Tony you lousy
wits and the Mitchell and Caulfield
should talk about Tony's future
meanwhile Caulfield kept requesting an
answer on his plans he had his heart set
on the proposal he'd spent long hours
preparing it and I knew he was going to
be very disappointed to learn that it
had been shot down every few weeks mr.
Caulfield would send me an item or two
to prompt my attention and it brought me
to take action I have submitted at the
committee in exhibit number nine the
types of items he would send I would
just file them and do nothing as I
decided that the best course of action
to save Jack's feelings was to let the
matter die a natural death through no
action indeed that happened by November
mr. Caufield realized that his plan was
dead and he abandoned the idea realizing
this he told me he would like to work
for mr. Mitchell during the campaign as
an aide to camp and requested that I
assist him in getting appointment of mr.
Mitchell I arranged for him to meet mr.
Mitchell on November 24 1971 pursuant to
mr. Caulfield's request I was not
present during the entire meeting but
Jack later said that mr. Mitchell had
requested did he do some investigative
work on the McCloskey campaign
apparently Caulfield convinced mr.
Mitchell that some greatly reduced
version of operation sandwich might be a
value or he was seeking to show Mitchell
what he could do at any rate coffee will
continue to call his intelligence
gathering operation operation sandwich I
have submitted to the committee exhibit
number 10 copies of the investigative
report mr. Caulfield prepared for mr.
Mitchell on the McCloskey New Hampshire
campaign and I hasten to add that to the
best of my knowledge
Caulfield employed no illegal procedures
and gathering this information pursuant
to the request of Ehrlichman that
Mitchell determine whether continued
funding should be provided for mr.
lazerwitz
Mitchell asked me what he last words
have been doing I told him I did not
know but I would have coffee'll prepare
a summary of the activities On January
12 1972 I informed mental that Caulfield
had prepared such a list and suggested
he meet with him I refer the committee
to exhibit number 11 I would also note
at this point that there is no list
accompanying that exhibit because well I
initially thought I did have a list I
have searched my records that are
available and I have no such list other
than the possibility of might be a list
in my files that remain at the White
House I do not recall how this matter
was resolved
but I believe some of you some
arrangement was made to compensate mr.
Elias but to my knowledge he was not
used any manner other than that to which
I shall refer later in my statement mr.
Caufield mr. Kalmbach would know about
the arrangements that had been made I
shall now turn to my knowledge of how an
intelligent unit was established at the
reelection committee the best of my
recollection it was the spring of 1971
mr. Haldeman discussed with me what my
office should do during the forthcoming
campaign year he told me that we should
take maximum advantage of the
president's incumbency and focus of
everyone in the White House should be on
reelecting the president it was decided
that the principal area of concern for
my office should be keeping the White
House in compliance with the election
laws and improving our intelligence
regarding demonstrations I was also told
that I should provide legal assistance
in establishing a reelection committee
and ensuring that they had their own
capacity to deal with the potential
threats of demonstrations during the
campaign and particularly the convention
I advise all of them that Jack Caulfield
was developing a security plan that he
wanted to discuss his plan with mr.
Mitchell mr. Ehrlichman I also told him
I would seek to get the interagency
evaluation committee working on the
potential or demonstrations during the
campaign and subsequently called mr.
Bernie Wells the head of the IEC to my
office and told him that the concern of
the White House for good intelligence
during the coming campaign during the
months that followed I devoted most of
my time to regular office functions
keeping abreast of the new campaign
legislation and familiarizing myself
with existing election laws the Hatch
Act and related laws it was not until
after the proposed Operation sandwich
had been shelved and Magruder had left
the White House to form the reelection
committee that I began receiving calls
from strong
ruder that I was expected to suggest the
lawyer to head up the demonstration
intelligence operation at the reelection
committee and to serve also a general
counsel on several occassions computer
told me that he would like to have mr.
Fred fielding my principal assistant for
this job Hayley and I discussed it but
rejected it for several reasons first
hailing with aware of the fact that I
was considering leaving the White House
at that time I was actually interviewing
for jobs outside the government and he
knew that I would recommend that he
succeed me as counsel secondly if I
stayed I would need his assistance
during the coming months I might add
parenthetically as I look back if I had
accepted the job I was interviewing for
at that time I would not be sitting here
today after I informed Magruder that mr.
Feeney was not available he requested I
suggest someone else because he was
desperately in need of an in-house
lawyer accordingly I next went to mr.
crow and asked him if David Young might
be available interested in probe told me
the young was very much involved in the
declassification project and could not
be spared the reason young had occurred
to me is that I'd spent several days
traveling with him in mid-october
interviewing prospective candidates for
nomination to the Supreme Court I might
add that during those days of traveling
around the country together he never
told me what the plumbers unit was doing
but I felt that mr. young was a bright
and extremely capable lawyer he would
make an excellent general counsel and
could handle the security and
demonstration problems the campaign
during my conversation with mr. Craig
about young he suggested mr. gordon
liddy might be available in that he had
just about completed his work
croaks broke they are very highly of
that his legal ability and said that his
FBI Treasury Department background in
law enforcement would qualify him to
handle a demonstration intelligence and
security operation for the reelection
committee I did not know mr. Liddy but I
respected crows croaks judgment both as
to the judgment of other lawyers in his
knowledge of law enforcement but had
dealt with a demonstration problem for
the White House before I joined the
staff I asked mr. probe to find out if
mr. Liddy was interested several days
later probe informed me that lidium was
interested and asked me to come to his
office probes office and meet Liddy and
describe the job I did this I told Liddy
that the primary responsibility for the
job was to serve this the lawyer for the
reelection committee but among the
responsibilities general counsel will be
keeping abreast of potential of
demonstrations that might affect the
campaign lady said he was interested
proed said that he would first have to
clear this with Ehrlichman I advised
them that mr. Mitchell and mr. McWhirter
in making the decisions on pulling the
pose and if Croke got the okay from
Ehrlichman I would set up a meeting for
a lady to be interviewed by mr. Mitchell
when mr. clove gave me the okay from
Ehrlichman I called mr. Mitchell I told
him that probe that everything's
approval had suggested gordon Liddy for
the general counsel post and I arranged
for lady to meet Mitchell on November 24
1971 after mr. Caulfield met with mr.
Mitchell I attended the meeting with
Mitchell and Liddy and I have submitted
to the committee exhibit number 12 a
copy of an agenda mr. Liddy prepared for
the interview session well I cannot
recall every detail
is discussed I do recall it was a very
general job type interview
Mitchell realized that Liddy was not
permitted with the election laws and
asked if I would assist him in any way I
could and getting himself remember those
laws I agree
there was virtually no discussion of
intelligence plans other than Liddy
would draw up some sort of plans most of
the conversations centered around title
and compensation
mr. Mitchell agreed that that he would
be titled general counsel I did not
recall the rate of his compensation I
also recall that Liddy asked mr.
Mitchell when you would actually join
the campaign but Mitchell said he did
not know after this meeting Mitchell
called me to say they didn't want a
Magruder to interview that he because
McGruder would need a man working most
with him I so advised bidding and on
December 8 1971 Magruder requested I
bring Liddy over to his office for an
interview interview in Magruder's office
on December 8th was brief and non
substitute Magruder told Liddy that he
had a host of legal problems that needed
attention immediately employing to a
stack of papers that I assumed contained
problems that he was concerned about
there was a brief discussion of Lydia's
responsibilities for demonstrations
means to be the campaign Liddy said that
after he got acclimated to the
committees problems and needs he would
draw up a plan Ramudu requested that
Lenny come to work as soon as possible
which I believed was the following
Monday after that he was hired at the
reelection committee I informed my staff
principally mr. redfield mr. David
Wilson that they should assist Liddy in
becoming familiar with the election laws
I made my election law file available to
Liddy and believed that he used him and
he had periodic contact with my staff
and myself and election law matters I
can recall that I had several
discussions with Liddy about his
responsibilities with the committee the
Reeve action committee
I'm complying with the election laws he
told me that he had more work than there
were hours in the day to complete it
I urged him to get volunteer lawyers to
assist him he suggested several lanes of
lawyers who might assist him I can also
recall at several weeks after Liddy left
the White House and is asked to turn in
his White House past that he came to me
and asked me to intervene in his behalf
so that I might so he might retain his
past and avoid that cumbersome
procedures of clearance every time he
wish to enter the White House I thought
that my office would have a good new of
contact with Liddy so I requested the
increment to keep his pass this request
was turned down however because they
decided to provide a fixed number of
passes for people at the reelection
committee and Magruder would decide who
got the passes I so informality and
never heard any more about the matter
the next time I recall meeting mr. Liddy
I might insert before this I did have a
brief occasion to to see him in early
January I believe about the 9th through
the 14th or 15th when he attended a
General Conference in San Diego on the
entire scope of the convention and the
security problems that were going to
confront the convention in San Diego
after that the next time I recall
meeting Liddy was at a meeting in
Mitchell's office in January 27 1972 he
wanted me to attend the meeting that I
learned that lady was going to present
his intelligence plan
I met Magruder and Liddy at Mitchell's
office let he had a series of charts or
diagrams which he placed on an easel and
the presentation while that he began I
did not fully understand everything mr.
Liddy was recommending at that time
because some of the concepts were
mind-boggling and the charts were in
code names but I shall attempt to
reconstruct the high points that I
remember as best I can
let he was in effect making a sales
pitch he said that the operation he had
developed would be totally removed
campaign and carried out by
professionals plans called from mugging
squads kidnapping teams prostitutes to
compromise the opposition and electronic
surveillance he explained that the
mugging squad could for example rough up
demonstrators that were causing problems
the kidnapping teams could remove
demonstration leaders and take them
below the Mexican border and thereby
diminish their ability the ability of
the demonstrators to cause problems the
San Diego Convention the prostitutes
could be used at the Democratic
convention to get information as well as
compromised persons involved I recall
that he saying that the girls would be
high-class and the best in the business
when discussing the electronic
surveillance he said that he had
consulted with one of the best
authorities in the country and his plan
envisioned far more than bugging and
tapping of telephones he said that under
his plan communications between ground
facilities and aircraft they'd also be
intercepted I might also add this point
he also gave an elaborate description of
intercepting various microwaves that
traveled around the country through
various communication facilities and I
cannot explain to the committee what
that was this to this day I don't
understand it each major aspect of his
proposal was on a chart with one chart
showing the interrelations with the
others each operation was given a code
name I have no recollection of these
code names with regard to surveillance
this was necessarily limited to
electronic surveillance he suggested
several potential targets I cannot
recall for certain it was during this
meeting or a second meeting in early
February that he suggested the potential
targets the targets that I recall he
suggested were mr. Larry O'Brien the
Democratic headquarters and the
Fontainebleau Hotel during the
Democratic convention mr. Liddy
concluded his presentation by saying
that the plan would cost approximately 1
million dollars I do not recall the
reaction during the presentation the
plan
because he was seated beside me but I do
recall Mitchell's reaction to the
Mission Impossible plan he was amazed at
one point I gave him a look of a element
and he winked knowing Mitchell I did not
think they would throw Liddy out of the
office or tell him that he was out of
his mind rather he did what I expected
when the presentation was completed he
took a few long puffs on his pipe and
told Liddy that the plan he had
developed was not quite what he had in
mind and the cost was out of the
question
he said he suggested to Liddy that he go
back and revise his plan keeping in mind
that he was most interested in the
demonstration problem I remained in
Mitchell's office for a brief moment
after the meeting ended as the charts
were being taken off the easel and
assembled and Mitchell indicated to me
that mr. Liddy's proposal was out of the
question I then joined Magruder and
Liddy and as we left the office I told
that hate to destroy the charts
mr. bloody said that he would revise the
plan and submit a new proposal at that
point I thought the plan was dead
because I doubted if Mitchell would
reconsider the matter I wrote back to
the to my office with Liddy and Magruder
but there was no further discussion of
the plan the next time I became aware of
any discussions of such plans occurred I
believe on February 4th 1970 to schedule
another meeting mr. Mitchell's office on
a revised intelligence plan I arrived at
the meeting very late and when I came in
he was presenting a scaled-down version
of his earlier plan I listened for a few
minutes and decided I had to inject
myself into the discussions
mr. Mitchell I felt was being put on the
spot
the only polite way I thought I could
end the discussion was to inject that
these discussions could not go on in the
office of the Attorney General of the
United States and the meeting should
terminate immediately at this point the
meeting ended I do not know to this day
who kept pushing for these plans whether
Liddy was pushing or whatever was
pushing whether someone was
Jean McGruder I do not know I do know in
hindsight that I should not have been as
polite as I was and merely suggesting
that let me destroy the charts after the
first meeting rather I should have said
forget the plan completely I would never
again discuss this matter with him
I told him that if any such plan were
approved I did not want to know meaning
of March 21st as I have indicated my
purpose in requesting this meeting
particularly with the president was that
I felt it necessary that I give him a
full report of all the facts that I knew
and explain to him what I believed to be
the implications of those facts
it was my particular concern with the
fact that the president did not seem to
understand the implications of what was
going on for example when I had earlier
told him that I thought I was involved
in an obstruction of justice situation
he had argued with me to the contrary
after I'd explained it to him also with
the matter of money demands had come up
previously he had very nonchalantly told
me that that was no problem I did not
know if he realized that he himself
could be getting involved in an
obstruction of justice
by having by having promised clemency to
to hunt what I had hoped to do in this
conversation was to have the president
tell me we had to end the matter now
accordingly I gave considerable thought
to how I would present this situation to
the president and try to make as
dramatic a presentation as I could to
tell him how serious I thought the
situation was that the cover-up
continued I began by telling the
president that there was a cancer
growing on the presidency and if the
cancer was not removed the president
himself would be killed by it I also
told him that it was important that this
cancer be removed immediately because it
was growing more deadly every day I then
gave him what I told him would be a
broad overview of the situation and I
would come back and fill in details
and answer any questions he might have
about the matter I proceeded to tell him
how the matter had commenced in late
January early February but that I did
not know how the plans had been finally
approved I told him that I had informed
Haldeman what was occurring and Haldeman
told me that I should have nothing to do
with it I told him that I had learned
that there had been pressure from Colson
on Magruder but I did not have all the
facts on as in the degree of the
pressure I told him I did not know if
Mitchell had approved the plans but I
had been told that Mitchell had been a
recipient of wiretap information and in
Harlem and it also received some
information through strong he then
proceeded to I then proceeded to tell
him some of the highlights that had
occurred during the cover-up I told him
that Kalmbach had been used to raise
funds to pay these seven individuals for
their silence at the instructions of
Ehrlichman Haldeman Mitchell and I have
been the conveyors the conveyor of this
instruction to Kalmbach I told him that
after this the decision had been made
that Magruder was to remain at the
reelection committee I had assisted
Magruder and preparing his false story
for presentation to the grand jury I
told him the cash that had been at the
white house had been funneled back to
the reelection committee for the purpose
of paying the seven individuals to
remain silent
I then proceeded to tell him the perjury
had been committed and for this cover-up
to continue would require more perjury
and more money I told him that the
demands of the convicted individuals
continually increasing and there was
sentencing eminent the demands had
become specific I told him that the that
on Monday the 19th I had received a
message from one of the reelection
committee lawyers who had spoken
directly with Hunt and had hunted sent a
message to me demanding money I then
explained to him that the message that
Hunt had been had told O'Brien the
preceding Friday to be passed on to me I
told the president I'd ask called Brian
White a Dean and O'Brien had asked Hunt
the same question but Hunt had merely
said you just passed this message on to
Dean the message was that Hunt wanted 72
thousand dollars for living expenses and
fifty thousand dollars for attorneys
fees
and if he did not get the money and get
it quickly that he would have a lot of
seamy things to say about what he'd done
for John Ehrlichman while he was at the
White House if he did not receive the
money he would have to reconsider his
options I informed the president that I
passed this message to both Haldeman and
Ehrlichman Ehrlichman asked me if I
discussed the matter with Mitchell hiya
told Ehrlichman that I had not done so
and Ehrlichman asked me to do so I told
the president I had called Mitchell
pursuant ehrlichman's request but I had
no idea of what was happening with
regarding the request I then told the
president that this was just typical of
the type of blackmail that the White
House would continue to be subjected to
and I did not know how to deal with it
I also told the president that I thought
that I would because I thought that I
would as a result of my name coming out
during the gray hearings be called
before the grand jury and if I was
called to testify before the grand jury
or the Senate committee no it had to
tell the facts the way I knew them I
said I did not know if executive
privilege would be applicable to any
appearances I might have before the
grand jury I concluded by saying this is
going to take continued perjury and
continued support these individuals for
to perpetuate the cover-up and I did not
believe it was possible to so continue
it rather I thought it was time for
surgery of the cancer itself and that
all of those involved must stand up and
account for themselves and that the
president selves get out in front of
this matter told the president that I
did not believe that all the seven
defendants would maintain their silence
forever in fact I thought that one or
more would very likely break rank after
I finished I realized I had not really
made the president understand because he
asked me a few questions and he
discussed it would be an excellent idea
if I gave some sort of briefing to the
cabinet and that he was very impressed
with my knowledge of the circumstances
but not seem particularly concerned with
their implications was after my
presentation during the time I was
having conferences with the government
prosecutors I was avoiding conversations
with Mitchell Ehrlichman and Haldeman as
much as I could however on several
occasions I did talk with Ehrlichman
while he was in California at one point
called me to ask me if I completed my
report that I've been working on Camp
David I told him it was still incomplete
he said that I should send him whatever
I had completed I told him that a
section dealing with segrete EES
activities which had been prepared by
dick Moore but which I had not reviewed
myself was complete as far as I was
concerned in what would sent it to him
he said I should send it to California
immediately on a dex machine he said the
Parliament was interested in getting
these facts out now because the timing
might be right
I sent the report that had been written
by Moore a copy of which I've submitted
to the committee exhibit number 40 is a
Shinto Mitchell about Paul O'Brien going
out to visit Holloman in California
Mitchell told me that he wanted O'Brien
to go out and visit with Haldeman and
that he had worked out the meeting I
felt like telling Mitchell that I
thought that when I learned that the
meeting had been switched from Holloman
to the Ehrlichman that O'Brien was being
set up that Ehrlichman would probe him
on everything he knew about Mitchell
Deane and anyone else involved I did not
know if that if this in fact occurred
but knowing that Ehrlichman and Haldeman
was very busy protecting their flanks I
would have to believe that it did occur
I've never talked with O'Brien about
what did occur during his meeting with
Ehrlichman Relic Minh also asked me if I
knew when I would be called before the
grand jury I told him I did not but that
my lawyers were discussing the matter
with the prosecutors
I did not tell him that I had already
met with the prosecutors but he told me
that he wanted to know when I was going
to be called because he wanted to talk
to me before I appeared I believe that
the president returned from California
on Sunday April 8 I was scheduled to
meet with the prosecutors that afternoon
my attorneys have been discussing my
testimony with the prosecutors and they
had worked out an arrangement whereby I
could give the prosecutors my knowledge
directly and what I told them would not
later be used against me if they should
prosecute me I felt that I should tell
Haldeman that I was going to meet with
the prosecutors personally so I called
him in California on the morning of
April 8th before they departed for
Washington
I made the call from mr. Shaffers office
and when I told him this he said that I
should not meet with the prosecutors
because as he said once the toothpaste
is out of the tube it's going to be very
hard to get it back in after this
comment I did not tell Haldeman whether
I would or would not meet with them and
in fact the meeting went up forward
during the meeting and while the
president was flying east I received a
call from Air Force one from mr. Higby
who asked me to be in wisdoms
ehrlichman's codename office at a
certain time for a meeting I believe the
meeting was set for four or five o'clock
I departed from the meeting with the
prosecutors to go into the White House I
went to ehrlichman's office there I
found Ehrlichman and Haldeman who had
just arrived from Andrews Air Force Base
and were and we chatted for a brief
moment about their trip I raised the
fact that I had read in the paper that
morning that Colson had taken a lie
detector test I said that I hoped
everyone is willing to take such lie a
lie detector test because will probably
be necessary now the cousin has taken a
test they asked me if I had met yet with
the prosecutors or knew when I would be
called before the grand jury I avoided a
direct answer to the question by saying
that my lawyers were still having
discussions with the prosecutors about
my appearance before the grand jury I
was then asked some questions about
testimonial areas but I gave them
evasive answers even these evasive
answers which related to raised matters
which related to them brought forth
responses that they did not remember it
quite as I did during the week of April
9th through April 4th mr. Deane let me
ask you a few questions about your
actions after the Watergate incident and
by asking questions about your own
personal involvement I hope I'm not
considered to be badgering you in any
way but I'm sure you realize as one
lawyers today in other
that your actions and motivations are
very relevant in fact if I were still at
the White House I'd probably be feeding
you the question is to ask the person
who's sitting here
well mr. Dean if I were here as I am I
would respond as I have responded that I
don't need any questions to be fed to me
from anybody after the break-in on the
19th I believe first of all that you had
a meeting with you had a meeting in mr.
Mitchell's apartment with mr. Mitchell
mr. Marty and mr. Magruder on the 19th
after you'd returned to Washington is
that correct as I testified to the best
of my recollection that was either on
the 19th or the 20th I arrived at the
meeting the meeting was already in
session I do not have any recollection
of that meeting other than the fact that
there was discussion while I was there
of sort of the public relations handling
of the matter that was at the end it was
certainly at the end of a day that it
occurred and was either on the 19th or
the 20th and I don't have a clear
recollection of which day that was you
didn't discuss the facts as to as to
what had actually happened and who was
responsible not at that time and I
recall previously that they met with mr.
Liddy yes I had and he had told you that
McGruder I believe had pushed him I sat
and listened at that meeting more than
talking at that meeting and I don't
recall reporting that at that particular
point well I didn't ask you if you were
a hoarder did I just ask you had you not
have that yes yes I had and and you're
listening between mr. Mitchell and mr.
McGruder
of course you realized that the three of
you were the same three of the same four
individuals have said it onto two
meetings which in which these matters
will discuss wiretapping this sort of
thing was that not sort of a sort of a
strange feeling you must have had there
on that occasion
didn't didn't your mind go back to those
previous meetings and you wonder whether
or not in fact mr. Liddy had been given
the goals that the go-ahead that had
already occurred to me when I met with
lit he had realized right away what had
happened I had before I met with Liddy I
had talked with Magruder Magruder had
told me that this was all that he's
fault
that's very clear to me then that Liddy
had proceeded either with or without
authorization it was after I talked to
Liddy that I was very fair and my
understanding that lady had been given
an authorization to proceed she never
talked to mr. Mitchell about it no sir
what had been your what had been your
professional relationship with mr.
Mitchell while you were at the Justice
Department I had a very new I haven't
had to say it was sort of a father-son
relationship in many ways mr. Mitchell
was very friendly to me
he was gave me some of the best
assignments I thought in the Department
of Justice he counseled me before I went
to the White House but I shouldn't go to
the White House he said I ought to stay
at the Department of Justice I liked mr.
Mitchell very much were you concerned
about his personal involvement if you
heard about the break-in I indeed was
but as I say mr. Mitchell to this day
there's been only one indication and
that was on a meeting on March 28th he's
given me any indication that he had any
involvement in this thing at all and
that was when I apologized to him what I
thought had happened and he said
something to the effect well yes it was
something like that that we thought was
maybe two or three times removed from
the committee when you turned over the
documents from hunt safe to mr. gray I
believe you stated that you did not tell
him to destroy them but that they were
politically sensitive that's correct
that's correct
I think I described him as political
dynamite did you ever tell him to
destroy those documents no sir I mean a
social occasion did you not in fact call
mr. Gray's subsequently and ask him
whether or not he had in fact destroyed
those documents no mr. gray and I
discussed the documents
at one of the meetings in his office and
I think early July or sometime of that
nature in which he told me that he had
taken the documents to Connecticut and
he had them there and he either
indicated to me that he was planning to
read them or had read them I am very
unclear on that at that time he had
mentioned nothing about destruction of
the documents and it was not until after
I'd had my meeting in January early
January with mr. Peterson and
subsequently I met with mr. gray that he
told me he had destroyed the documents
do you say when he had destroyed them no
I did not do you know when he destroyed
them from the other source did you ever
call him and ask him if he had read the
documents no I did not all right is
there any is there any other use that
you made or the White House made of the
FBI on matters such as that that come to
your that come to your recollection now
I can recall again after the fact
getting involved in a situation that
involved a FBI investigation that was
made of mr. Daniel Schorr and when I
learned about that after the fact I was
told that what had happened is that mr.
Higby had who was with mr. Holland's
assistant had received a request from
mr. Haldeman when he was traveling with
the president to direct the FBI to do an
investigation of mr. Shore mr. Hoover
proceeded with the investigation but to
the dismay of the White House he did a
sort of a full field wide open
investigation and this became very
apparent
this but the White House in a in a
rather scrambling position to explain
what had happened the long and short of
the explanation was that mr. Malik who
at the time knew nothing about this said
that mr. Schorr was being considered for
a post and that this was a part of a
preliminary investigation in
consideration of mr. Schorr or a
presidential appointment and I believe
in the environmental field all right any
other instances that you recollect as to
the use of the FBI on the White House
and along these lines let me let me be
let me give you a broad range might mark
these down so that we don't have to go
over each one and this type of situation
that either involved the FBI or the
Internal Revenue Service CIA military
intelligence Alcohol Tobacco and
Firearms Secret Service let me start
from the bottom the list back I do
recall and I mentioned in my statement a
rather broad reference to the fact that
intelligence came from surprising
sources sometimes at one point one of
the top officials at the that the Secret
Service brought me a small intelligence
printout regarding Senator McGovern and
just left it with me and said I thought
this might be of interest to you it had
to do with mr. senator McGovern
attending a fundraising function
I believe in Philadelphia and apparently
there were some there were some
references in the intelligence statement
to the fact that either communist money
or communist former communist supporters
were going to attend the fundraiser
I took the document to mr. Colson
and I said are you interested in this as
soon as it was given to me not to to
bury in my files and but I said I don't
think you can reveal the source of the
information he said I'm very interested
in it
he took it
and later told me he had made
arrangements to have it published now
with regard to ATF mr. Caulfield was at
ATF after he left the the the white
house and going by way of the reelection
committee and from time to time he would
send over tidbits of information
regarding individuals some of this might
be reflected in my file because I cannot
recall ever doing anything with this
information other than filing it the CIA
I don't recall myself receiving anything
that we might call politically
embarrassing information from the CIA
about any individual the memorandum I
received from the CIA were were straight
classified documents regarding
activities of some anti-war
demonstrators or people traveling to
Hanoi and things of this nature also
foreign funding of domestic radical
groups and things of this nature which I
would forward generally to dr. Kissinger
or general Hague with regard to the FBI
I've mentioned that IRS I think that you
will find in either exhibit five or
possibly maybe six reference to some use
of the Internal Revenue Service and
requesting information or dealing with
situations with regard to the Internal
Revenue Service I'm also aware of the
fact that after an article was published
on mr. rebozo I got instructions that
one of the authors of that article
Manhattan problems I didn't know how to
deal directly with the situation I
discussed it with mr. Caufield I was
reluctant to call mr. Walters who was
the head of the Internal Revenue Service
and suggest that he do anything about
this mr. Caulfield apparently had
friends in the Internal Revenue Service
and I believe he told me he was able to
accomplish an audit on the individual
what the consequence of the order was I
don't know who is the individual I do
not recall for certain it was one of the
I think was one of the Newsday persons
who worked on a rather extensive article
on mr. rebozo all right are there any
other instances of which you have
first-hand knowledge in this as I say if
I were to to go if I were to spend a
week or so in my files I could probably
chapter and verse everything that had
come to my office in this regard but I
am trying to come off the top and and
tell you what I I can recall off the top
I would hope I would hope mr. Dean mr.
chairman that mr. Dean would do just
that to refresh his recollection as to
whether there is anything further that
he has been unable to come forth with
what I tell the White House is has made
an arrangement whereby I can go to my
files but I must say it's a rather
awkward arrangement there are some five
file cabinets that are all safes and
there is no desk in the room to work and
I must work under the supervision of a
[ __ ] service agent and there's no
place to sit down with any comfort and
right so it's a little difficult to get
in there and do anything and hopefully
if I were to do that we could make
arrangements so I could get in and and
spend the time of it necessary to go
through the files now most general the
other thing is of course I have to do
this all by hand writing because I'm not
allowed to make any copies of anything
in my files then just to briefly review
and this lend my questioning and I
apologize to the committee for taking so
much time because it's a subject that I
confess I don't have every last bit of
information on it's a difficult one to
piece together but I think it's a very
important part of the story to be told
and I think it's become clear here this
afternoon that another step has been
taken another step further along the
road from testimony which mr. McCord
gave whereupon he was receiving
information from the Internal Security
Division
to the next step where at least insofar
as the structure of the plan of 1970
which plan included bugging burglarizing
mail covers breaking and entering in the
light and so far as the mechanics or the
the administration was concerned that
the first step was taken on also that
even though that particular unit did not
involve itself in any illegal activity
certainly the security arms of the
United States government were in various
instances which you were cited utilized
for purposes not intended would that be
a fair summation of what we're talking
about here well I'm not quite sure of
the end of your summation there and
wonder if you could repeat that you said
security arms were used even though the
IEC even though the IEC itself did not
gauge in any illegal activities do you
consider the matters which you've spoken
of whether it be an FBI investigation of
an individual or an IRS audit you
consider that to be legal and proper
activities by those security arms as I
say I don't know of the IEC itself
preparing political material I do of
course know and as I have submitted in
documents other agencies were involved
seeking politically embarrassing
information on individuals who were
thought to be enemies of the white house
I might also add that in my possession
is a rather very much down the lines of
what you're talking about is a
memorandum that was requested by me to
prepare a means to attack the enemies of
the white house there was also
maintained what was called an enemies
list which is rather extensive and
continually being updated
I'm not gonna ask who was on it I'm
afraid you might answer I wonder does
the are these documents that are in the
possession of the of the committee no
but I'd be happy to submit him to the
committee they didn't fit within the
request that I had with counsel as to
the documents he wished to have produced
but if the committee does wish them I'll
be happy to submit does the Chairman I
think the committee would like very much
to have a copy of that memorandum all
right sir I have no further questions
Jerry now let us go into mr. Ziegler's
press statements on June the 20th
1972 he made this statement which
appeared in the Washington Post he told
reporters in Florida were with the
president that he would not comment on a
third-rate burglary attempt now would
you agree with me that that was not a
third-rate burglary attempt I would
agree it was not a third-rate burglary
attempt and I have no idea what the
source of this story was how would you
characterize the Watergate burglary
that's a very very that's probably the
most difficult question it's been asked
yet I would I guess I'd have to say
there was probably the opening act of
one of America's great tragedies well
you answered it very well
now on October 17th 1972 mr. Zeigler
statement appeared in the New York Times
he told reporters as follows it goes
without saying that this administration
does not condone sabotage or espionage
or the surveillance of individuals or
source stories that make broad sweeping
charges about the character of
individuals
he also said my quote I am NOT going to
come in on stories based on hearsay or
were innuendo or character assassination
is involved I am NOT going to dignify
that with a comment end of quote
now would you say that the
administration was engaged in techniques
such as were condemned in this statement
by mr. Ziegler at the time and during
the campaign of 1972 I would say that
these things did occur I would also say
as I believe I mentioned in either an
earlier question with mr. Thompson that
the degree of mr. Ziegler's briefing
varied at times he was told enough that
he could handle a story I also believe I
testified that I thought it would take
me probably another 200 pages of
testimony to explain all those briefings
I have not had an opportunity to go back
through all of Ziegler's briefings to
determine for example I could spot very
easily which briefing
I helped him on and which I didn't but I
haven't done that senator well then do I
understand you to say that there are
briefing papers for every press
conference by mr. Ziegler and for every
press conference by the president
available at the White House yes sir
every time mr. Ziegler gives a briefing
it is recorded
in by open by a court reporter type
situation and that is kept in record
form and those are distributed to
various members of the White House staff
but again I have not had access to get
back to these mr. Chairman I would like
to ask you and counsel to subpoena these
briefings the briefing papers so that
they'll be become available to this
committee I'm sorry we're in the process
of getting them all right and did you
also state that
Thank You mr. chairman thank you very
much mr. Deane first I want to thank you
for swapping places we move so I can
fulfill it engagement late Thank You mr.
chairman there's no way on earth I could
swap places
but I thank you for that and I'm happy
to relinquish my place in the sequence
of questioning so that you could
complete your very very thorough and
very very important line of questioning
this morning I was about to say mr. Dean
that you've been a very patient witness
you've been very thorough he presented
us with a great mass of information
almost 250 pages in your written
statement voluminous testimony in
response to the interrogation of members
of this committee and we're very
grateful some of the specific
allegations that you make in your
testimony are at least prima facie
extraordinarily important the net sum of
your testimony is fairly mind-boggling
it isn't my purpose and these questions
that are about to follow to do what
would ordinarily be the expected
function of a committee member and to
try to test your testimony I think that
you've subjected to a rather rigid
examination by my colleagues on the
committee thus far and of course your
testimony and its credibility its
importance and relevance will fall into
place not only in terms of its own
independent significance but in terms of
its relationship to the testimony of
other witnesses now you're a lawyer mr.
Dean and I needn't go into a long
preamble about what I'm about to do but
so that you understand what I'm trying
to do I'll give you some brief
explanation in advance as I said just a
moment ago it is not my purpose now to
try to test your testimony it is not my
purpose to try to impeach your testimony
to corroborate your testimony to
elaborate or extend particular aspects
of it but rather to try to structure
your testimony so that we have a
coherent presentation
against which we can measure the
testimony of other witnesses here to
forgiving and the testimony of other
witnesses later to appear and of course
against whatever other information the
committee can gather from circumstantial
evidence from whatever source it occurs
to me that at this point the central
question and in no way in derogation of
the importance of the great volume
material the implications that glow from
it but that the central question at this
point is simply put what did the
president know and when did he know it
in trying to structure your testimony I
would ask that you give attention to
three categories of information that
information that you can impart to the
committee that you know of your own
personal knowledge that type of
information that we lawyers refer to as
circumstantial evidence which would
include evidence given based on your
opinion or on inferences you draw from
circumstances and the situation and
third that type of evidence that
ordinarily would not be admitted in a
court of law but is admitted here for
whatever purpose it may serve that is
hearsay evidence or evidence about which
you have only secondhand information I
would hope that in that third category
that is in terms of hearsay evidence or
secondhand information that we would try
you and I to limit the scope of that to
situations which may be further
ventilated by the testimony of other
witnesses on the roster of witnesses to
appear before this committee because if
we range too far there is no way that we
and compare and assess and evaluate the
importance of that testimony but I want
it and I'd like to divide the
information then as we go along into
three parts that is direct evidence
circumstantial evidence and hearsay our
secondhand information I am in no way
criticizing your testimony I think
you've really been a very remarkable
witness but I would offer my my
remarkable witness but I would offer
experiment I might say this in preparing
my testimony I made a very conscious
effort to not write a brief against any
man but merely to state facts
sequentially as close as I could by
sequentially I mean some things it was
necessary to follow forward to explain a
given sequence of events that bring them
out of a time sequence but I did not by
design try to write a brief or a
document that focused in on any
individual or any set of circumstances
surrounding any individual rather laid
them out in the totality of their their
context I understand that mr. Dean and I
really do hope you understand that what
I'm saying to you is not a criticism of
you nor any implication of criticism
rather instead you have presented us
with the sequential presentation and I'm
trying to convert it into an organized
presentation according to categories and
to the quality and scope of the
information that you possess so please
believe me I'm not trying to attack your
testimony but rather to organize it for
our own committee purposes there's one
other thing I'd like to say and it may
or may not be possible to do this and
again I'm not being critical of you as a
witness as I said just a moment ago I
think you've been a very remarkable
witness but when I used to practice law
I used to call on the trial judge from
time to time to instruct the witness to
first answer the question and then to
explain it so I hope I can keep my
questions brief and I hope you might
preface your answers with the yes or no
if that's possible and then whatever X
nation you wish that is not meant to be
an entrapment it is not do you still
beat your life question the answer yes
or no but it is meant to try to advance
the advance the cause of fact-finding
under the hit under the heading of what
did the president know and when did he
know it fall several subdivisions the
first one is the break-in at the
Democratic National Committee
headquarters at the Watergate complex on
the morning of June 17 1972 do you know
what the president knew of that in
advance I do not do you have any
information that he did know of it I
only know that I learned on my return to
the office that events had occurred that
indicated that calls had come from key
biscayne to Washington to mr. stron to
destroy incriminating documents in the
possession of mr. Haldeman the question
is I hope not impossibly narrow but your
testimony touches many people it touches
mr. Ehrlichman mr. Haldeman mr. Colson
mr. Mitchell mr. Dean and many others
but I'm trying to focus on the president
what did the president no president what
did the president know and when did he
know it is it possible for you to say
that based on direct knowledge or
circumstantial information and you've
given us an indication of circumstances
or even hearsay can you tell us whether
or not you can shed any further light on
whether the president knew or in the
parlance of tort law should have known
of the break-in of the Watergate complex
on June 17 you mean did he have prior
knowledge of it yes I
cannot testify of any first-hand
knowledge of that I can only testify as
to the fact that anything that came to
mr. Solomon's attention of any
importance was generally passed to the
president by mr. Haldeman
and if mr. Haldeman had advanced
knowledge or had received advance
indications it would be my assumption
that that had been passed along but I do
not know that for a fact
so that would fall in category 2 of my
organization that is that is an
inference that you do draw from the
arrangements of the organization of the
White House and your knowledge of the
relationships between the relationship
between mr. the mr. Haldeman and the
president that is correct
but it does not fall into category 1 or
3 which is to say direct knowledge or
hearsay information from another part
that is correct the cover-up